https://kittyspace.org/leviathan0.html

1. DETERMINE YOUR SCOPE
How big of a story do you want to tell? Is it epic? Is it small? Are you crossing vast swaths of the land or are you confining three characters to a room and letting them endure each other for eternity? It's very, very easy to get lost in the process of building your personal playground if you don't give yourself boundaries at the start. Once you've determined the scope of the story you want to tell, you can establish boundaries: this far, and no farther. I'm taking it to the edges of the city. I'm taking it to the front door of the house. I'm gallivanting across the world.

Determining your scope also helps you figure out the purpose of the story. Are you telling something deeply personal or are you taking your reader on a grand adventure? It helps you fill out some problems your character(s) might face along the way. A person confined to their house faces many different challenges than a person who's traipsing all over the wide world and back again. Again, we're working with the idea that worldbuilding is a tool that helps us tell a better story. This is a functional, goal-oriented approach. Flights of fancy are two doors down.

Write a paragraph of up to seven sentences describing the scope of your story. Note both the general scope and exceptions where you might go outside it or spend some time focusing on one or two particular aspects. Put this paragraph in the forward-most section of your binder; this goes under summary information.

2. DESCRIBE YOUR CHARACTERS
Yes, this is an important part of worldbuilding, too.

The nature of your characters plus the scope of your story will determine how much of your world you'll need to build for background purposes. If you're not forcing your characters to interact all over the world, but rather only in their own home town/home territory, you'll have less geographical area to cover. And on the other hand, think about how much of the world we live in affects how we think, talk, dress, act, and react. Your character's thoughts and responses, actions and questions, will be affected by the world in which your character grows up. In either case, you'll be spending roughly an equivalent amount of words describing several different locations and cultures from an outsider perspective, or describing one location and culture from an in-depth and insider perspective, or somewhere in between.

You don't need to answer everything in exhaustive detail, but you do need to figure out some basic things. We'll get to the details later.

Again under 'summary information', write a paragraph of up to seven sentences detailing your protagonist(s). This will also give you an idea of how cluttered your cast may or may not be. Just go off the cuff, list the most striking features of your protagonist, whether that's physical appearance, grace, intelligence, background, a personal possession, a pet, or a relationship/set of relationships. Keep in mind that all those will need to be developed later. It's also okay to say "I have not yet decided A or B." You'll have to circle or otherwise choose one later, but it's okay for right now to have some options open.

3. DESCRIBE YOUR ANTAGONIST(S).
As with your protagonist, your antagonist(s) can tell you a lot about the world you're making. Write a paragraph about your antagonist.

4. STUDY YOUR CONFLICT
There's an old idea that the core plot of most works can be narrowed down to person vs person, person vs outside world, or person vs self. It's true. At the very least, it's true that the core conflict in a story can usually be boiled down to A vs B.

Write down your A vs B at the top of a page. This is your focus of your novel, your core conflict, what drives the action and the plot. Han, Luke, and Leia vs the Empire. The Fellowship of the Ring vs Sauron and his minions. Malcolm Reynolds vs everyone else in the gorram universe. Now go down the page and write down some basic questions, and you already have the who and the what, hopefully, but if you haven't, write that down as well. If it's character vs an outside force, what is the outside force? When: Is this story taking place over a few days or over several years? How is the conflict manifested, subtly in many smaller conflicts or blatantly? Where do the conflicts manifest? And if your scope is small, this will be a very easy question. If your scope is larger, you'll need to describe some locales, cities, towns, countrysides. A sentence or two will do for each.

At the bottom of the page, write a paragraph of up to seven sentences describing the why. Why is this conflict happening? What brought these things into conflict? Is it contrariness, is it an aspect of the protagonist character that forces conflict, is the protagonist seeking it out or did conflict drag the protagonist out of bed kicking and screaming? This all will go into summary information.

5. OUTLINE YOUR STORY
No, seriously. Outline your story.

Because this is a functional approach, you need to have an idea of where your story is going so that you have an idea of what you need to develop. You really don't want to go off into a 20 page tangent about sewer systems in one city because you got distracted with the mapmaking program one day and by god you're going to put those sewer maps to use. At a minimum, divide your story into acts (nine acts in groups of three for epic stories, three acts with an intro and coda for mysteries, googling will help you find basic formulae for most kinds off stories). Write one to three sentences for a scene-by-scene outline, two paragraphs for an act by act ouline. We'll come back and develop the outline itself later, and in the meantime we'll use it as a basis to develop the rest of the world. I mean it. You will be referring back to your outline every step of the way.

For now, we'll go back up to the character sections (2 and 3) and cross-check that with your outline. Do you have enough characters to fill the story? Do you have some extraneous characters? On a piece of scrap paper or in the margins of your outline, make a note of every time a new character appears in your novel. Then make sure that character is represented in your protagonists or your antagonists section.

Some characters won't be main characters. They might barely even be speaking roles. That's fine, for now just write their names or designations (Teacher, Bartender, Random Passer-By) under either the protagonist or antagonist column or, if they're filler or background scenery, make a third category for that. All you need to know now is that they exist. What your expanded cast looks like, which will already tell you how populated your world will be. There, you've learned something new about your world already!

6. DETERMINE YOUR TECHNOLOGY LEVEL.
This may seem complicated, but it really isn't. Go back to your outline. Look at all the scenes or, if you don't have it scene-by-scene yet, all of the acts, or the general progression. Write down five items of technology you will need for each section, whether it's a Simple Machine or a cell phone or even something in the background that may never be referred to in the text itself. Knowing it's there will help set the scene for you. You can duplicate items if a character's cell phone, chemical camera, or Antykitherian device becomes a plot point, as long as you have those items of technology for each section.

Overall, this should give you an idea of how technologically advanced and oriented your society is. Some societies place more of an emphasis on technology than others. And, looking back at your scope description, you might go through a couple different attitudes. Your item list should reflect that.

There are a number of ways to rate the level of technology available to and pervasive within a society, and you can pick one of those if you like. You can also just have a general idea how advanced your society is from the items you've chosen. However you do it, write at least two paragraphs describing the level of technology in your world. Write at least five if your scope is vast. No more than 1 1/2 pages of material, but you should have a sufficient description of how advanced technology is that someone reading it over can have an idea of what your world looks like in that way. File this in a separate section of your binder or under a separate word document, Resources.

7. DETERMINE YOUR ECONOMIC VARIANCE.
We'll look at two things when we're determining this: your character's economic background and your outline.

Start scene by scene, and if you're doing this on a grand scale, start only in one city or small country. We'll get to the rest later. On a fresh piece of scratch paper, look at each scene or act or block of outline that takes place in that city or country and jot down two to three sentences about the economic aspect of the setting. Is it an opulent, rich setting? Poor, depressed neighborhood? Somewhere in between? What does it have in terms of resources and what is it lacking? Are people managing a subsistence living or is there a surplus, or is the focus on luxury at the expense of actual stability? That will give you some idea of how varied your work will be and, obviously, how much you'll have to expand your world and your background.

On a separate piece of scratch paper, jot down two or three sentences about the economic background of every character who appears or lives in that city or country. I mean every character. Even the ones you didn't give a name who barely have one or two lines, like Charlie Brown's Teacher or the Cheese on the Head man.

Now go over all these sentences. In your binder under 'Resources' start a new sheet of paper, this time from the least amount of economic resources and going up. Start with a header of 'Least Resources' and either copy over or clarify (you may find that having to rewrite your notes a couple of times gives you ideas or clarifies your thoughts) all your notes from your scenes and your characters. You can, if you know you'll want to come back to it, highlight the times when your main character's name appears, so it catches your attention. Then go to the next highest, which might be 'Lower Class' or it might be 'Working Class' or it might be another, less politically-loaded term. If you know you want to give your world its own vocabulary, now would be a good time to start; there's always some kind of set of words to describe who has Stuff and who doesn't.

By the end of all of this you should have roughly a paragraph each describing the economic strata you'll be running into in this city or country. Each paragraph should be at the top of its own page (we'll get to why later). Some of it you'll be visiting in the description of the scene you're working on, and some of it will be in the form of assumptions your characters make. Maybe they're used to everyone having a vehicle or mode of non-ambulatory transportation. Maybe they're used to getting medical care when they need it. Maybe they don't take having enough food for granted, but your character's background will shape how they think about and react to what you're throwing at them. It might even help add a scene or two to your work.

8. MAGIC, YES OR NO?
This can be an obvious decision for some novels: mainstream, some mysteries, most crime or pulp novels are overwhelmingly set in a world where magic has no place. Almost all fantasy (now including urban fantasy) novels have magic in some form or another. Still, you should put at least a little thought into whether or not you're going to put magic into your novel, and why. Three to five sentence paragraph, under Summary information. Consider, also, magical realism and the weight some events in your novel might have if you leave it ambiguous as to whether or not it was magic or simply coincidence. This is where your outline comes in handy! You know things like this already, or you know where you need to figure it out.

Inevitably, if you do this long enough for enough different worlds, you will come up with a few problems. As with magical realism example, you'll run into the problem of "I want X but not Y." The easiest thing to do right now is to write that, and then leave several lines and set it aside. Come back to it later. You'll be building up a number of different aspects of the world all at once, they won't all be fully developed one after the other sequentially hitting all the bases A through Z.

The second easiest thing is to ask why. Why this and not that? Why one but not the other. Start writing down reasons, and then reasons for those reasons. See what either looks likeliest or what fits together best, what has the most concrete basis. Start with the first things that come to mind first and what seems to follow logically, and then start thinking outside the box. Again, only a handful of lines for this. We'll go back to it later.

9. DESCRIBE CULTURE
Everyone has culture. Everyone. No human being exists in a vacuum, and if a person lives with even a few other sentient beings, they have a culture. Monkeys, dolphins, and even whales have behaviors for both play and work that are taught from parent to offspring.

The easiest place to start developing your culture here is from your outline. Go through and find the parts where you have to establish character, or the scenes where you have a location or mood to establish. If you don't have plot to move forward, you have a location or mood to establish. Creating some sort of culture or aspects of one gives depth to the world in which your characters move.

On a piece of scratch paper, write one to three sentences for each character-establishing or location- or mood-establishing scene describing some point of the culture in which it takes place or that the point of view characters comes from. This can be episodic media entertainment (tv-series, radio series), single-unit media entertainment, literature, activities, art, architecture, historical re-enactments... anything non-subsistence and unique to that collection of people. You might not put in all of these as a descriptor, you might not even put in half of them. But if your character is casting an eye around a dark alley is he seeing posters for electronic music raves or old playbills for theatre shows? Is she likely to note the CDs on a person's shelves or that the decor of the home is incredibly retro? What kinds of games are people playing in the park? What parts of the body are taboo to show? This goes, unsurprisingly, under 'Culture'

How you organize this section is up to you. You could organize it by arts and entertainment, businesses, sports and activites, or you could get more or less specific. Either way, you'll want to start out with some sub-categories in your culture section, and this is as good a place as any to do it. Sort each point of culture into a sub-category.

10. DETERMINE DIVERSITY
As with before, you need to take a look at how many people you'll be showing your reader, and adjust proportionally. Go back to your outline and scribble in the margins the number of people who have speaking roles in each scene. If you're not down to scene by scene yet, ballpark it.

Diversity means a lot of different things. There's racial diversity, gender diversity, and ability diversity, just to start with the things that can be easily seen. There's also sexual orientation, social or economic class, religion, and so on and so forth. Pick five points of diversity to consider when making the demographics of your characters, and group all the speaking parts into those categories. Try to make these points of diversity relevant to your outline, although some of it will be background information that's never outright stated in the text. Be sure to consider that some categories will have a 'null' field, for example, if a person doesn't own a home or reside in any one place and therefore cannot be a resident of District anything.

Make categories for each of these points of diversity, record three to five sentences describing each one. For example, in this world there are various species of sentient beings, with 'sentient beings' as the overall category. Humans are the dominant category, followed by the fae, Hellhounds, and ghosts. Some other types of creatures such as shades and pixies are of controversial origin, and may be a subspecies of humans or fae, respectively. In X city there are two types of people, the people who live in the city proper, and the people who live in the suburbs but consider themselves as being from the city. In this country the dominant religion is Pastafarianism, but other religions include Discordianism, the Church of the Sub-Genius, and the worshippers of Cthulhu. In this story you have fifty two folk with Stars Upon Thars and thirty-seven plain-bellies.

This, too, goes under culture. And if you find that some of your categories aren't relevant to your outline later on in the writing process, feel free to add some. Don't remove any unless it's to change the nature of the category, because that can always serve as fodder for later stories.

11. DESCRIBE YOUR PROTAGONIST CHARACTERS
Unless your novel is very, very self-contained (think No Exit), you'll need to have certain information about your main characters. Take your original paragraph about your protagonists and copy it to the top of a fresh page. For each of these write a short 3-5 sentence paragraph: Technology/technological knowledge available, which can be anything from the simple machines to AIs and robotics. Economic/social class, what resources does the character have access to and what resources does the character go through on a regular basis? Magic abilities or mundane skillset, which may or may not be job related; what kinds of skills and abilities does the character use or think about on a regular basis? Culture and hobbies, what does the character do during off-hours? Classifications, whatever points of diversity you determined above. And finally, vital statistics. Height, weight and build, coloration and physical description, health, age.

By the time you're done with each of these paragraphs, make a shorthand list for each category. One or two word summaries of the items in each category. Some of them you'll be able to cluster, depending on the characters involved, others will be more disparate. Either way, these are all areas you have now established as being in your world, genders, activities, skills, and resources. Put these in your characters section, and keep in mind that we'll be referring back to the lists and descriptions later.

12. DESCRIBE YOUR ANTAGONIST CHARACTERS
Do the same for your antagonist characters. Consider that antagonists usually have slightly different skillsets than protagonists, because of different factors, different interests. Consider also that antagonists aren't always (aren't mostly, even) polar opposites in most day to day matters. The antagonist is the person who is working counter to your protagonist, your main character, setting up the conflict that drives the plot. They might not be evil. They might not even be overtly malicious. In fact, if you can forget that these are the antagonist characters, it might be better to do so. You're creating vivid, well-rounded characters, and which position they occupy in the conflict is not the focus of this exercise.

13. DESCRIBE THE ECONOMIC AND RELATED SOCIAL CLASSES.
Check your resources section for economic classes you've outlined. You should have a designation such as "upper/middle/lower" or "working/ business/leisure", or you might have made up words in your first economics exercise. Whatever terms you use you should have a less-to-more scale of economic classes as you flip through the resources section of your binder. Take a pile of scratch paper and copy over each class or designation or term onto its own paper, because you'll be doing a lot of scribbling before this gets organized.

Find the occupations or other source of income for character in each class, and sort them. Use that as a jumping off point to jot down five or six other vocations in each economic class. These jobs might never appear in your work, but it gives you a more rounded idea of the sort of people who enjoy that level of economic wealth. Include volunteer or part-time positions if you want. For example, a person considered middle class in this world might work as a drop-ship maintenance engineer, a teacher at a government funded school, or a lab technician. Volunteers at the soup kitchen in this district of the city tend to be of this economic class, whereas clinic doctors tend to be of this other economic class.

This would be easier if we had transparencies that we could overlap, but since we can't we'll make do. Look at your list of occupations, vocations, and professions, then consider how many social classes there are in your nascent world. Go back to your binder and below each paragraph detailing the resources available in each economic class, write another 3-7 sentences paragraph describing who the people in these economic classes are and what they do.

Remember that while economic classes are more or less rigidly defined by earning power, cost of living, and other concrete factors, social class is more fudgable. Someone with title or an old family name might be very poor and trade on the sympathy of their title or name, while someone who is wealthy but has only been wealthy for a generation or less might have a different set of manners than otherwise. Add a third paragraph, 3-7 sentences, describing the hobbies, lifestyle, mannerisms, and noteworthy details about the lifestyle of each group. In other words, put the socio- onto socio-economic class.

14. DESCRIBE THE TECHNOLOGY FOR EACH SOCIO-ECONOMIC CLASS
Staying in your resources section, add a new paragraph about about the technology available. This technology might be as basic as the wheel and the simple machines, to iPods and netbooks, to as complex as small spacecraft and food replicators. If you're stuck for ideas, build off the lifestyle and expectations. Go back to the outline and see what this character would need to accomplish the things that character accomplishes. Do those things needed fit within the character's socio-economic class? Are they outside of it? If so, what is within the socially expected boundaries of that socio-economic class?

Keep in mind also that "technology" is here used very, very loosely. A peasant in a hut with access to a spinning wheel and a loom has weaving technology, it's just that the technology isn't what we think of in terms of it doesn't involve electricity and things going beep. More specific than 'resources' but less specific than "communications devices" or "entertainment," consider it "things with moving parts that can break and need to be replaced." Very nearly every socio-economic level has them. Shoes have moving parts that can break and need to be replaced. It's just a question of what, what parts, and how easily can it be done.

15. REPEAT STEPS 7, 13, AND 14 UNTIL DONE
Remember when I said we would come back to step 7 if we had to? Now's the time. If you're working on a single-city or single and small-country scale, congratulations! You get a breather. If you're working on a multiple city, multiple country, or multiple-planet scale, congratulations! You get to do steps 7, 13, and 14 all over again.

One of the reasons this is a world-building Leviathan is because it is designed and intended to build off a skeletal structure, your outline, and create system on top of system that supports itself, your world descriptions. And that means digging into a whole lot of things that might never see the light of day in the final draft. Particularly if you're working on a planetary or galactic, epic kind of scale, you will run into the convention that everything must be described in vast and expansive detail. Think of this as filling in the detail beforehand, and doing it in such a way that it's consistent all the way through. Because of the tendency of sentient beings to behave in patterns and develop cultures in patterns, a lot of this will seem repetitive. It doesn't have to be. This is also a good place to compare your different cities or your different socio-economic strata and put in little quirks or vivid details so that when you finally sit down to write, it's less repetitive or monotonous to start with. Or at least less onerous.

You also might find it helps, if you're dealing with an epic scale work, to keep each planet or city or country or some other group, separate within your resources section. That's entirely up to you.

16. DEVELOP YOUR SKILLSETS
Go back to your character sheets for each character, and get out a couple more sheets of scratch paper. Starting with the first character that comes to mind or hand and continuing through, write down each skillset, i.e. each hobby or occupation, volunteer position or vocation. One to three word identifiers will do. Right now all you're doing is making a list of the activities and jobs that feature in your work.

Next to each skillset, or in some way that links to the skillset name, write down five or six skills that a person in that position would be expected to have. A writer would have advanced knowledge (one hopes!) of spelling and grammar in at least one language. He or she might also have typing skills, research skills or organization skills. Don't laugh, writers, it's true. A priest might have counseling training, knowledge of religious rituals of his or her particular religion, perhaps some history, and certainly would be literate if not well-read. A pilot of a small transport ship would need to be skilled in mathematics and astrocartography and have practiced reflexes. And so on and so forth. If you don't know what skills are required in one job or another, ask! One of the miracles of this thing called the internet is that you ca be in communication with many, many more people than you would otherwise.

Keep in mind that a single character might have several skillsets, depending on what they do for a living and how many hats they wear in their daily life.

In each character page, underneath the character information you have so far, write down a three to five sentence paragraph per skillset that that character possesses. Ultimately you might have five or six paragraphs describing the skills your character possesses, and now keep in mind that other people in this world will have these skills as well. If you find yourself in abrupt need of fleshing out another character you'd only given a moment's thought to, you might want to go back to these paragraphs and see that you had a fishing boat captain who played for Irish dancers in her spare time, so this other musician might have these skills but also those of that racing jockey over there. Mix and match!

17. FAMILIARIZE YOURSELF WITH THE RELEVANT DETAILS
And back to the outline again. Remember when I said this was going to be a functional approach geared towards writing a story? I meant it.

Look at each scene of your outline. By this point if you only have sections or acts, you should pencil in a rough scene progression. For each scene, write down the overall activity taking place, one or two sentences should do it. Now go back to your character pages. Take a look at the skillset required, and go back to your outline and add a sentence or two (or more if you need it) describing in more detail what these characters would be doing. It's a little complicated, so here's an example: Say you have a scene in which a musician is rehearsing for a concert later on in the novel. Your scene notes might look like this.

// Sascha and the gang rehearse for Horrorfest.

In which case you would go back to your skillset grouping and check the related skills, then go back to the outline and add a couple sentences.

// Sascha and the gang rehearse for Horrorfest. Sascha is doing a sound check while Steve tunes up his bass. Jules has the set list in front of him and is making some tweaks.

Because we often write what we know, what appeals to us, a lot of this will involve going over information we already know. However, again, you might find you're writing a science fiction novel about robots and what you know about robotics would fit on a thimble. This helps guide your research so that you don't get sidetracked and fleshes out your novel at the same time.

18. DEVELOP THE CULTURE AROUND THESE VARIOUS ACTIVITIES.
Go back to your Culture section, and have a look at the categories you've created. Then have a look at your list of skillsets. With a little luck and maybe a little fudging, almost all skillsets should also fit into a 'culture' sub-section. You might have to add one or two, depending on how specific you went initially.

Under each sub-section, for each skillset, write a three to five sentence paragraph describing it in the progression from novice to mastery. Add another couple of sentences describing the social weight, positive or negative, attached to the skill grouping. Finally, determine how common or rare the skillset is. For example:

Culture --> Crafts --> Pottery. Here goes a description of the progression of a potter, from where they might take classes and learn the skill to what they might be able to do once they master the skill. Followed by a couple of sentences describing what people in the setting or settings would think of a potter. Followed by how common skilled potters are in this world.

Culture --> Sports --> Pod racer. Here goes a description of the progression of a pod racer, from how one learns to drive a pod to what the life of a famous pod racer might be like. Followed by a couple of sentences describing how they're viewed by the public, followed by how common skilled racers are.

Culture --> Finance --> Corporate lawyer. You get the picture.

If you find yourself coming up with other skillsets, or something that just doesn't fit, by all means, add it in as well. Keep in mind that we're looking at culture in an anthropological sense, which is commonly and originally defined as what people do in a society. This involves knowledge, beliefs, customs, habits, laws, practices, rituals, expectations, hobbies, products, foods, transactions... many, many things. If you're not doing it for your immediate survival (eating because you're hungry, sleeping because you're tired) chances are it has some culture attached to it. Right now we're just taking skill groupings and describing them in the context of a larger culture because it's easier to approach describing it piece by piece.

19. DESCRIBE POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE BIASES
Go back to your character sheet and look at all the aspects of the characters you've listed so far. Get a piece of scratch paper and start writing down all the negative prejudices each aspect of this character might face. I highly recommend separating them into economic, biological, social, professional, etc. Then go into your culture section and, in a whole separate section from your previous categories (which are most likely all to be related to Things People Do), write about a page on each overall prejudice grouping on that list. Double check against your diversity entry in your culture section, and if you don't already have a representative of most of the main categories, you might want to add a line or three about the negative views of other people on the categories not represented by your characters. Just because you don't have catmen as main heroes or villains in your work doesn't mean someone won't start bitching about how filthy and savage they are, even as an aside.

Some of these will overlap from character to character, i.e. unless you have a two-person cast with one man and one woman, your women and your men will share the potentiality of being treated as their gender rather than as a whole and individual person. Likewise you might have three scientists in your work, and so they might face the same outside perception as being snobby and intellectual. Thus, rather than separate it by character, clump them all into groupings and organize your thoughts into a paragraph for your culture section.

Keep in mind that these are external perceptions, not descriptions of what these people or practitioners of certain skills actually do or are like. Also, some stereotypes and opinions might only be held by one group within that same category against the other, i.e. literary authors prejudiced against genre authors. Crips against Bloods, etc.

Do the same thing with prejudices for, and put them after prejudices against in each category of bias. Remember that bias exists in positive or affirmative aspects as well as negative or derogatory. Also keep in mind that the aspect of a person, race, religion, or skill or profession that one group of people hates and derides might be the same aspect another group of people praises, or vice versa. Now we are focusing on the positive impressions, so keep it to the praises. If it gives you an idea for a bias against, go back and note it in the appropriate section.

20. DEVELOP TABOOS
Start off with checking your outline: how many distinct culture groups are coming into play in your world? Overall groups, to start with, because we could go on all day describing subcultures and that's later. We're working in a broad sense, now; for every distinct culture group (Mainstream American, Mainstream Barsoom, Mainstream Harry Potter Wizard) write five paragraphs: one paragraph each of five to seven sentences describing a taboo activity, state, desire, or thing. One sentence description, two or three sentences context, and one or two sentences explaining why it is taboo, even if it's just "because people find it disgusting."

21. DEVELOP YOUR FACTIONS. WHAT ARE THEIR MOTIVATIONS?
Look at your character notes and your outline. By now you should have enough structure in it that you can pick out everyone's goals, both for the main individuals and for various groups in the story. Every person or group of persons who drives the plot should have a discernible goal or motivation. Even some of the groups or individuals who don't drive the plot but provide background color or red herrings might have a discernible goal or motivation. Note that when I say "discernible" I mean that you should know what it is and be able to tell or remember from your notes. You won't need to spell out everything in your story text itself. In fact, if you have a clear idea of your characters' motivations and you've written well enough, your audience should be able to determine the overall shape of your character's motivations by their actions and words, without you needing to state it clearly.

For now, we'll break it into two parts. At this stage all we need to do is name the factions, the individuals or groups of characters, or even groups acting within your work as a single entity. Organizing them by general goal sometimes makes it easier to draw lines and collect people together under a single umbrella entity, but you don't necessarily have to.

On a piece of paper under "Settings" (a new category!) write down the names of each of these groups. It can be a single name of a company or organization or it can be a descriptive phrase, such as Evil Bastards With Scythes And No Sense. Write down the names of all the characters in each faction, whether they're proper names or just descriptive. Write down a brief two to three sentence summary of the group, its goals, its resources, and its public presence (if it has one).

At this point you can do one of two things, depending on what you feel capable of handling. You can either expand your factions to fill in some gaps, flesh out the world, or muddy the waters of your central conflict or you can leave it as is.

22. DEVELOP GEOGRAPHY. CONSIDER YOUR OUTLINE AND WHERE YOUR STORY WILL BE SHOWCASING.
Go back to your outline and your scope description. For this, you'll need at least a blank sheet of paper; at most you might want a CAD program like Campaign Cartographer. We're going to be making a map.

Start with your origin point in the first scene. Keeping in mind the scope of your work, sketch out the next few locations with respect to the first location. If you're writing a trek across the known world, this might turn out to be a series of the first few towns or landmarks. If all the action is taking place in a city, it might be a handful of businesses within a few blocks of each other. Your map will not be a specific predictable size, and it doesn't need to be to scale. As long as you have the relative positions of every location to all the others, and a scribbled-down idea of the distance, you'll be all right.

Now go back to your outline and your character sheets. Both of these will provide secondary locations for you to map out, in references to places and the distance between where the characters are and where these places are. You might also come up with a name that is totally that town over there, or the perfect name for this blues bar, or whatever, go ahead and stick that in there! Eventually in your work you'll find you have a character who's rattling off names of places to have dinner, and that's when things like this will come in handy.

All of this comes under "Settings." If you're using a CAD program, make some printouts. If you're just sketching it out (and don't forget to include distances or a scale bar at the very least!) you might want to make some copies or scan it in so you have it backed up somewhere. You might also find it helpful to copy and laminate, or blow up and laminate, another copy if you're one of those people who uses whiteboards or corkboards to plan things.

23. CHECK YOUR SCOPE. IS IT AS BIG AS YOU THOUGHT? AS SMALL? ADJUST.
While you're looking at the scope of your work, check it. Is it as big as you thought? As small? Are you discovering you have a bigger story to tell than you thought, or are you sticking only to a handful of characters because you've bred way too many plotbunnies and drawn way too many plotlines? Adjust. This is also a good place to finish or pad out your outline. No, seriously. It helps. You might have discovered that issues have come up that you want to deal with, so this would be a good time to work in those little scenes or line references to deal with them. Issues such as plot holes, lack of motivations, too many potential motivations, or visible character development.

(Note: visible character development is different from behind the scenes character development. Once you get some practice in, usually character development is one of those things that makes itself known, if you know them well enough. But it's always a good idea to go back and check to make sure that what your readers see is clear and follows about as logically as sentient beings get, one action from the next.)

24. DEVELOP YOUR FACTIONS IN GREATER DETAIL.
I put this section a little distance from the exercise where you create your factions, players, and sides, because I wanted you to get a bit of distance from it. Now we're going to go back to it and flesh it out a little more.

Everything you write that involves more than two or three "moving pieces," i.e. people or cohesive groups of people who want a thing and take steps towards that, your work will get a little more complicated. Two people in a work who each want something is a potential conflict. Three is a potential cyclical conflict, and four is a potential pooch-screw. And so on and so forth until you have political dramas where everyone is backstabbing everyone else and you need a chart with string in three dimensions to keep track of who's doing what to whom at what time.

If you didn't flesh out your factions earlier, now is the time to do so. Expand each part, motivations and resources and membership qualifications and so on, till each one is at least two or three sentences in and of itself. If you did, pull out your outline and compare your faction list with what your outline looks like. Which groups will you be spending more time with? Which groups are just background players? More complicated, which groups appear only in the background of maybe two scenes but also perform actions that echo throughout the work? One author wrote a scene in the third book of his series where the main character lives through an event that comes back to bite him in the ass in books five, six, and seven, and that's just where I can think of the connection off the top of my head. Two characters who got maybe a line reference in that scene returned in book seven in a major way. It's much more helpful to plan things like that instead of trusting that later you can go back and insert them, or trusting that the story will spontaneously generate hidden shadowy figures of conspiracy as necessary.

Make notes on your outline where your factions appear and their goals and influence is significant. If you have a chapter that's mostly a shopping trip designed for a bit of character background and for the character and her best friend to deal with a recent death of a third friend, probably your faction chart isn't going to figure into it. If you have a grand conclave wherein many parties are going to hammer out a treaty, you want to keep track of who's trying to move what pieces where. Again, all your faction notes go in "Settings."

Lastly, go through your character sheets and add in a sentence to a paragraph's worth of text, depending on the importance, of detail about any groups these characters might be involved in. Just so you have that information in the one place, too. Also review your character's relationship with the faction: is their membership obligatory because they were born to the Tudors or the Capulets? Does their membership in the League of Pog Collectors mean they can't have a monogamous relationship with someone of the same or opposite sex? Or, more likely, does no one in the LPC care? Or is the LPC a small group of five people in a restaurant somewhere and they only care because the group is so small that everyone knows everyone else's business?

25. CONTINUE DEVELOPING. WHAT ARE THEIR HISTORIES?
Flipping through your character sheets, outlines, and notes, what are the most developed factions in your work? Either in terms of how vivid they are in your head or in terms of how prominent they are in the outline. Go back to your Settings section and pick up their pages.

Starting with the ones that are least vivid but most prominent in your outline, if such a thing exists, write five or so sentences describing the history of these factions. How they were founded, who has historically been a member if the membership has changed, what was the original goal and how that goal has changed, how long ago they were founded, etcetera. Go back to the root questions of Who, What, When, Where, How, and Why if you're stuck for details. Try not to overlap too much with the motivations, you already have that information down. You might also, if the inspiration strikes, list notable people who are members and a phrase on why this person is notable.

26. CONTINUE DEVELOPING. HOW DOES YOUR CHARACTER FIT INTO THESE FACTIONS? HOW DO THEY AFFECT THE STORY?
This information goes on your character page. Possibly in its own section, depending on how prominent it is within your story. First list your character's role in the faction, then go through the data points you have on your character already. Connect them to your character's relationship with this faction. Remember that not all data points will have relevance to the character's relationship with or membership in the faction, just because a character is monogamous, for example, does not necessarily mean the League of Pog Collectors cares.

27. DEVELOP GEOGRAPHY. CONSIDER YOUR OUTLINE AND WHERE YOUR STORY WILL BE TAKING PLACE.
Hey, look! It's your outline calling again! You've been working on characters, and you'll go back to them in a second, but first, get that scratch paper. Go over your outline and jot down every different location you have at which a scene takes place. Jot down how far apart these are, roughly, whether they're different locations in the same city or town or different towns in the same country or different planets. Different planes of existence. Go back to your character information and do the same. Group these locations by city, by borough if it's in one city, by country, by however many categories you need to. Write down a minimum five sentence paragraph describing each geographical location you will be working with.

28. DEVELOP TRANSPORTATION.
Consider your outline and how many times your characters will be traveling between places. In your geography section, beneath each location, write down a sentence or two saying how this location can be accessed. Then go to your outline and write down a phrase to a sentence worth of information explaining how these spatial transitions will be accomplished. Walk, skate, Segway, bus, car, bike, horse, wagon, motorcycle, hoverboard, light-cycle, gryphon, giant eagle, transporter, spaceship, wormhole... Also jot down travel time, because that will help you when organizing your in-novel timeline.

29. DEVELOP GEOGRAPHICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF SOCIO-ECONOMIC STRATA, CULTURAL GROUPS, AND RACIAL/SPECIES GROUPS.
That sounds technical, but basically what it means is mapping out your locations in terms of what sorts of people live where. Where are your upper class people, where are your slums, and everything in between. If there are clusters of people from one cultural or racial group or another, etc. Sketch out, whether you use a mapping program or a pencil and blank sheet of paper, what goes where. Keep in mind the scope of your novel; if you're dealing with a planetary scale, you can be vague and generalize regions of the planet, making up a stereotype or two. If you're dealing with a city-wide scale, you might as well go into a little bit of detail. These details can come in handy later in dialogue or setting.

30. MAP YOUR CHARACTERS' TRAVEL THROUGH THE NOVEL, GEOGRAPHICALLY. CHECK TRAVEL TIMES. LOOK AT WHAT YOU'LL HAVE THEM PASSING.
Go through scene by scene, and since you're doing it anyway you might as well make your timeline. Highlight, bracket, or otherwise separate the scenes in your outline, day by day. Put, in a different color of text, the travel times between scenes. Then go 
 of the outline and start again. Add a sentence or two next to the method of transition (bike, helicopter, wormhole) describing in very general terms the location the characters are coming from, and the locations they'll be passing through on the way to where they're going. Even if it's nothing more than a blue column of light.

31. NAME EVERYTHING
Name the fuck out of everything. EVERYTHING. (This will probably also be a breather because not EVERYTHING needs to have a different name, you just need to decide whether or not it will.) Go through your outline and decide what this, that, or the other is named. Then go through your notes and decide what this, that, or the other is named. This will prevent you from going back later and flailing because you forgot that you had a city over there with no name and no way for people to refer to it in the story. Keep in mind that "the City" is perfectly acceptable, so long as in-text you make sure to have all your characters treat the same city in the same way, so that there is no ambiguity as to where your characters are referring to/going.

32. CHECK YOUR SCOPE AGAIN
Check your scope again. Do you need to go further out? Further in? (We'll start with further in.) If you need to go further in, now is where you want to do it. You have a pretty good starting point for the world you're creating so far, now take a bit and read your notes and your outline. What areas seem a little thin? You can expand in all sorts of ways, you can put in more side characters, friends, co-workers, fellow hobbyists, fellow faction members, people who share one category or another with both your protagonists and antagonists. You can include more setting description, you can stretch out the travel time to either give your characters more introspection or more setting description or both.

If you need to go further out, expand your scope, you'll need more character profiles. You'll need more locations, and you'll need a purpose for every extra detail you add. This will likely involve more poking at your outline than your world notes. If there are points you feel you need to make but haven't been, details in your world bible you want to flesh out but don't have room for in your outline, character aspects or dilemmas you want to explore more closely, or global ramifications to character actions. First, expand your outline. Then go through each section of your world bible so far, point for point, and expand your section accordingly. Geography, socio/economic data, factions, skillsets, etc.

One thing I would be very careful about doing at this point, although it's not directly related to the process of world-building, is I would be very careful about adding another sub-plot to your outline. If you do that, you'll have to go back from the beginning and make sure all of these questions are answered for all the new locations and characters you'll be meeting, and it'll be labor intensive and possibly throw a lot of things out of whack. If you think you're going to do that, though, here would be a good place to do it.

33. LIST THE INFLUENCES ON YOUR CHARACTER.
On a piece of scratch paper, go through your character section for each character and list off every person, place, or event that had a strong influence on your main characters both protagonist and antagonist. You might even want to separate them that way, as persons, places, or events. This will require a lot of cross-checking all over the place, so definitely use scratch paper. With each influence, add in a couple of sentences explaining how and why.

When you're done with this you'll need to do two things, not necessarily in this order. You'll need to summarize these influences on your character in a brief biography. Make it about a page or two, and start from the earliest point in your character's history you can think of, tracing the events in his or her life from inception to the start of the novel. Remember to add in details like where they learned their profession, when they picked up their hobbies, when they met their friends. Mark off notes in your timeline when specific events happened in your character's past, and this will also help you refresh on what kind of events your character might have been reacting to.

The second thing you'll need to do is go back over these persons and places and shuffle them into your character and setting sections, respectively, if they're not already in there. Flesh out each person influence with at a minimum a seven or so sentence paragraph on how they have interacted with the character you were working on. You can also go back and do most to all of the character exercises in this Leviathan. Then do the same for the places. You might want to locate them on the map or they might already be there, in which case you might want to add in a few more lines of description.

34. STUDY YOUR CULTURAL BIASES.
We have a lot of terms for the ways people interact with and treat each other. Familiar, impersonal, aloof. Racist, sexist, ageist, ableist, classist. Gay panic, transphobia, misogyny, white guilt, whether positive or negative there are a lot of terms for how we feel about each other as an individual about groups. Let me repeat that last part, as an individual about groups. Once you get to know a person on a one-on-one level it's harder to piece out what part of your reactions are to the individual and what part are to a group or classification to which that individual belongs.

So. There are two places where the prejudices of your work's population will come into play. The first is in the outline. Go through it, looking at all the places where people interact. Look at the people interacting and put yourself in each character's shoes. Do they share a trait with the other people in the scene? How do they feel about traits they don't share? Are these feelings, either the in-group ones or the out-group ones, strong enough to affect how that character behaves? If so, is there a term in the society for this? Is this term shared throughout all parts of the societies touched on in the novel or are there other terms? Jot down at least five and at most twenty phrases, with a couple sentences of description, based on what you find in your outline. For example: . This will go under culture.

Next, go through your character sheet and look at both the feelings your characters have about other people in their lives and their similarities and differences, and the feelings your characters have about other people's perceptions of them. The questions will be similar, but you might find one or two other terms you hadn't encountered before. Add in the ones you didn't find in your outline under culture.

Finally, go back and jot down in your outline a one-sentence note for each encounter in which prejudice is a factor, just to remind yourself later. (And when you're hitting those blocks, you might be glad of that note, too!) Go back to your character sheets and summarize the attitudes your character gives out and receives, with a line or two added to each influence on your character's life, how this factored into it. Leave out the ones where it wasn't a discernible factor, of course.

35. CREATE YOUR CHARACTERS' YOUTH AND CHILDHOOD, THEIR LIFE STORY
You have where your character is now, and it's time to organize this a little better and figure out where your character came from. Go through all the information and straighten it out into a timeline. You can either rewrite your original information so that everything is laid out in chronological order or create a separate document for the timeline.

Once you have all the backgrounds for your main characters, use the very rough progression of a life in this world you're building to create a series of three or four templates for what is the standard of normality. These templates don't have to be of a specific person with a name and a family history, more like a series of experiences, rites of passage, and expectations of a person as they age in the society you're creating. There might be greater or fewer of these, depending again on the scope of your novel and how many different societies you'll be dealing with. Your character specific information goes in your character section, but the general information on a more normative childhood goes in culture.

36. DEVELOP THE NORMATIVE LIFE EXPERIENCE.
Now flesh out the templates. Give each sentence a paragraph or more worth of description. Start with infancy, how most people are born (in a hospital, in a home, in a convent?), whether or not there is a new birth ceremony such as a baptism or a name-giving, and go on from there. You should continue to have at least three or four templates unless your entire cast list is three or four people long. Even in a single city, different people will have different life experiences and different ideas of what is normal for them, depending on race, class, social status, etc.

If you're stuck for what kinds of points in a person's life to describe, consider the biological stages of a sentient being's life first. Get back to some very basic basics. For most sentient beings in fiction, whether mainstream or science fiction/fantasy, there are some simple biological steps shared by all sentient beings. Birth followed by a short period of infancy, then childhood for lack of a better but less obscure term. The period between developing basic motor and communication skills and the next stage, puberty and adolescence. The developing of advanced biological functions such as procreation and advanced communication, strategy, and thinking skills. In other words, teenagerhood. Then the body stops growing and for a variable length of time, you have an adult of the species. Then the beginning of the body's decay as processes function less and less well, and then death. And for each of these stages, humans and other sentient life forms generally create rituals or cultural expectations around them, to explain and assist with the transitions between one stage and the next.

At the end of this exercise you should have several pages worth of an individual's journey from birth to death, three or four variations. Again, you might have more variations depending on the scope of your work, and you might have fewer. All of this goes in the culture section.

37. DEVELOP PLACES FOR YOUR CHARACTERS' YOUTH AND CHILDHOOD
Back to location-based world-building! Back to your maps! Go through your characters' youth and childhood, the typical experiences, and start marking down the places they've been on your map. Even if it's just a dot with a flag. Do the same for the normative templates. Then give each location at least three to five sentence paragraph under the 'Settings' section. Before you were writing about neighborhoods, now you're writing about individual buildings, school houses or malls or stadiums or day cares.

Keep in mind that all of these places have contexts as well. Are these neighborhoods, towns, or even planets nice places to grow up in? Is life hard for children, or are there plenty of families and safety networks to help them out? If you're working with places you've already started to flesh out, you might know this. If you're working with an entirely new section of geography, look at the character and how they grew up and use that as a jumping off point to think about what these places might have been like. Think about who the people who worked there were like. You can even, if you get inspired, write a couple paragraphs about them with the same format as you have for your tertiary characters, your bit parts. World-building in this way is a bit like terraforming (or at least how I imagine terraforming to be, since we can't quite do that yet.) Once you lay down your basic components, all kinds of unexpected things start growing.

38. DEVELOP VARIATIONS ON THE NORMATIVE EXPERIENCE.
Look at your normative life experience and tweak it. All life plans never come to fruition quite as one either expects or wants, but there are some obstacles that crop up that are predictable. Sudden poverty, for instance, sudden disability or sudden wealth. Take a look at the timeline for the normative experience for this world and pick five to ten points where a person's life might abruptly diverge from the norm. Write several paragraphs based on what you already have written (in that same manner) for each divergence, which also go into culture.

39. DEVELOP YOUR WORLD TIMELINE
Develop your timeline. By now you've got a lot of events, an outline, and a lot of character history. Use your character history and your outline and your world bible so far to develop a timeline of your world. Use the start of your novel as your zero hour and expand both forwards and backwards, starting with the events you've already set down. How fast is technology developing? How are social attitudes changing? Go back and forth between this timeline and your character information, making adjustments as you need to. This part goes in Setting, because the history also makes a part of the setting.

Keep in mind that sometimes things can change very, very fast. There are people living now in a country where legal racial equality is assumed (though not necessarily fact) who have grandparents who were assumed to be slaves. There are people living now in a country where individual thought and exchanges of ideas are everybody's privilege who grew up in that same country where conformity was demanded. The majority of the population living today grew up before the internet and thus information (true or false) became commonplace, before exchanges of ideas became easier for many, many people (but not everyone).

Keep in mind also that some things change very, very slowly. Look at the Catholic church. Look at Judaic practices. Look at the idea that things and people that are different from us are dangerous and subversive and should be squashed, that idea hasn't changed much in recorded history.

40. CHECK IN WITH YOUR OUTLINE
Check your outline. How much of this needs to be developed beyond one or two lines? The sad truth is, probably not much. But despite the attention to outlines, this still isn't novel writing, this is world writing. We're building a base for you to go on writing, or let your novel go in whatever direction it needs to. Check your outline, see what you have that you've developed, see what you don't have. Be aware of how much time you're spending on things you'll never put into your novel. Don't do any writing right now, just organize your thoughts, because after all that it'll be pretty chaotic.

41. LOOK AT ALL OF YOUR CHARACTERS, SORT OUT AND LIST THEIR DEMOGRAPHICS.
Take a look at all of your characters who have names or speaking parts and take a census of them. Have a look at Wikipedia or the census for your country (if your country takes a census) for ideas on how this is laid out. You might need a lot of scratch paper; the simplest way of doing this is to separate your characters into categories you want to take census of and make hatchmarks below each category for every character that falls under it. It seems like pointless statistic work, but it'll give you an overview of your world as you've created it, which is a good way of seeing if your statistics match the image of your world. For instance, if you picture your city streets as being full of orange people, with the occasional blue or pink person, and you realize that half your major or named characters are blue people, a lot of your single-line characters are blue people, and a lot of people in your orange characters' pasts are blue people, either you need to redo your demographics or your city has a peculiar enclave of blue people. Which implies all other kinds of things about diaspora, cultural centers, and migrant populations.

If you're like me and you have a bizarre fetish for graphs, pie charts, and spreadsheets, you can even make this all prettified in a presentation. But that's not necessary.

More seriously, this is a place where author biases can show up. Not because they're creeping in more here, author bias is a sneaky little bastard that's always around nibbling at your fingers. I mean, now that everything's crunched down to the numbers, this is where the numbers will reflect what you're doing underneath. Take a good look at your racial demographics, your sexual demographics, cultural, sexual orientation, species, social class, and wealth. Make sure that if you're focusing on one cultural group (Fiddler on the Roof, ), one gender (Oz, Shawshank Redemption, The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie), etc, that there's a good reason for it.

42. WORK THE LINGUISTICS
Now that you've got your maps, your demographics, and some history and idea of the places, skills, and activities you'll be dealing with, it's time to approach an area that could be overwhelmingly vast or dismissively small. Linguistics!

Not the science of linguistics but the application of language to the context of your work. At its simplest, this might mean you have a small division between characters who speak with complex phrases and multisyllabic words more often than not, who don't say 'um' or pause or repeat themselves when they speak, and characters who say 'ain't' and 'um' and 'might be.' If that's all you're doing, I suggest you at least take a look at the works of Elmore Leonard, or listen to Robert Downey Jr speak. Look at authors who are known for their dialogue, and listen to speakers who have vivid manners of speaking. Paying attention to their habits will help you polish your dialogue so that it sounds more natural and thus more vivid within your story. Your prose, descriptions and actions, will come out in your own voice, and that's as it should be.

If, on the other hand, you're creating whole new worlds, fantasy worlds or new planets and spacefaring races, you might be at the more complicated end of the spectrum with creating a constructed language, or 'conlang.' And there are pages and pages and pamphlets and websites on creating a conlang, though I don't have one to recommend immediately to hand. I'm not going to recreate them here, I'm just going to suggest that this is a good time to take what you have and use it to build a conlang, if you feel the need.

Somewhere in between is the world of dialect and jargon. Jargon gives the flavor of authenticity to your work, but it must be used sparingly so that your broader audience knows what you're talking about and for the love of Twain use it correctly. Ask a specialist in the field in which you're writing if you're not sure. Dialect will make your work vivid, as I said, but it helps to have the right dialect in the right place. Elmore Leonard, Joss Whedon, (and others) are all good examples of writing dialect. They know how people speak and they know how to re-create it so that it feels real to the audience. Ian McShane, Robert Downey Jr, (and others) are also good examples, more on the acting and delivery side.

Look at your outline and your character sheets. Your character sheets will give you some idea of which characters might have distinct speech patterns from the others; think of characters who are from a different place or a different time than most, or think of characters for whom you want to highlight a particular aspect like class or heritage. Your outline will give you some idea of where it's appropriate. Consider that you probably speak more formally or at least more politely at your job, or if you're talking to an official person, than if you're relaxing with your friends. Finally, once you've figured out what your characters' dialects should reflect and where you're going to put them, it helps to make a dialect sheet. It's not hard; a dialect sheet is basically a list of bullet points: quirks of language such as having no articles (Russian) or repeating a word for emphasis (most pidgin dialects), and phrases you might substitute for commonly known phrases that either have fallen out of use or that you've made up entirely.

One last thing to consider as you're finding places in your outline where dialect and jargon goes is, again, clarity. Will writing all chapters that are from the steerage boy's point of view in a lower class, East End type of dialect help sell the story, or will it confuse the audience? It takes some practice to find the balance between the two. Handing it off to a first reader or three helps.

43. DESCRIBE EVERYTHING!
That was potentially a long exercise, now we'll have a short one, and a fun one I hope. Descriptions! Start with the places and people you're working with in your outline and scribble down in the margins, on a sheet of scratch paper, or on a sticky note, one sentence of description for each of the five senses. As many of them as you can, at least, most characters aren't going to go around licking things. I hope. If you have time and inclination after that, go through and add these descriptions to other places, other characters. Add taste or smell or sound memories to the rites of passage and typical experiences you worked on earlier. Flesh out your world, make it vivid, not just in the organizational or grand details, but in the little things, too. What does it smell like? How do the buildings feel to the touch?

44. SYSTEMS OF GOVERNMENT (IF THE SCOPE IS BIG ENOUGH) OR LOCAL BUREAUCRACY (IF THE SCOPE IS SMALLER)
Only a few major world-building processes left! You can do it! Go back to your scope and look at it, and check it against your outline. We're going to address some more stuff that will (in most cases) remain in the background, but nonetheless will be important in your world.

If your scope is large enough, you'll be dealing with one or several nations. Collections of land and people who have agreed to be united by a name, a line on a map, and perhaps most importantly (certainly most relevant to our exercise) a system of rules by which everyone agrees to abide, and a collection of people who draw them up and enforce them. Note that I did not say the collection of people, i.e. the government, is agreed upon by the people who are governed. That's not always the case.

Have a look at your scope, your outline, and your geography. How many countries will you need to make up? Have a look at all your materials, which is why we save this one for last, and see what you've built up around the story you want to tell. Are there a lot of characters with professions in caregiving or teaching? Are there a lot of soldiers? Is this a well organized land or a land in chaos with everything falling apart? A lot of these things have already been decided, when you were deciding what normal life experiences were and how difficult it was for your protagonists (or antagonists) to obtain some things. Re-read these notes and see what they point to, and then answer the following questions in a page or so of description:

What services are provided by the government? What taxes, tolls, and fees are exacted? How much control does the government have over the population, and how much does the population have over the government? How is it structured to perpetuate itself? To limit itself? How does the population see the government, and how aware are they that different forms of government exist? How aware are they of how the government functions, and what its role is and restrictions are according to the existing laws? What questions haven't you answered that you should be asking? Because I know I haven't covered them all here.

You'll need to do this for every nation you have. You may do this for all the nations you have ideas for, but the point of making this geared towards the outline is that you don't do more work than you need to for the purposes of your work. Splashing around in the creative pools of world-building is for after. It might also help to familiarize or re-familiarize yourselves with the general types of government: republic, democracy, aristocracy, etc. Communism, the social contract. Most of these are short reading. And a tour of most wiki sites on dictators should, if you can stomach it, give you a brief overview of how such governments are run.

45. RELIGION
As with government, this is something you'll have built the foundations of already with what you have in your notes so far. In this case you'll be looking at the cultures, the outline, and the demographics of your characters. The demographics will tell you the proportions of your characters, how many overall groups there are and how big they are in relation to each other. The outline will tell you how much detail you need to go into in order to give proper flesh and flavor to your work, and the cultures will tell you where your characters' priorities are, and what shapes them.

46. FLORA AND FAUNA
This is one of those things that could either be a huge section or could be the length of a paragraph. Also one of those sections you might decide you want to go back to and enlarge, enhance, etc, later. Right now, all you need to do is go through your notes and write down one to three sentences of description in every location where a plant or an animal might be significant (say, if a particular store has seeds or seedlings for sale, or if a particular place sells pets or pet items too, or items for farm animals) and the same for every character who might have an animal or grow a plant in their home. If your society as you've built it so far is heavily dependent on work animals, expand that to a paragraph per animal or plant: what kind of uses do they have, both in general and specific to the character. How difficult is the upkeep. Etc.

47. HISTORICAL ACCOUNTS
Now for some fun exercises! Go back in your timeline and write at least two 500 word newspaper articles, historical accounts (such as by a scholar), or some other similar piece of documentary writing about two different events that happened in your world's past. Then write two more articles about the same event, but from a different point of view, any different point of view. How would a writer for the Daily Prophet cover the Arab Spring? What would a person's diary entry from Tatooine look like at the height of the Rebellion, as opposed to someone on Coruscant? They don't have to be opposing points of view, just different enough for you to get a good contrast.

48. SHORT SKETCHES
Write five short pieces of fiction, dialogue heavy, from the following list: buying groceries, researching an unfamiliar topic at a library, making a large purchase (house or vehicle), enrolling in a class either academic or vocational, dealing with a crisis involving emergency services (this may include religious figures), revealing a secret to a/several friends or relatives, discussing plans for the future with a spouse(s) or lover(s), talking through a personal crisis of love or faith, courting a person, interviewing for auditioning or a job or apprenticeship or other similar position. These don't need to be from the point of view of a main character, it's just to give you an example of what a person in your world would talk like or do in any of these situations. The emphasis on dialogue is to keep it focused on the characters, but if you want to focus more on the setting (or use the setting as a character, which a number of well-crafted works of fiction have done) you can, too.

49. VISUALS
One for the visual learners! Make at least two pictures sketching out two everyday scenes in your world OR two establishing scenes in your work. Not action scenes or plot-heavy scenes, establishing scenes where you're setting out the most prominent characteristics of your protagonists, antagonists, or settings. Sketch, use photoshop, cut out magazine pictures and make a collage if you want to. Just do something visual, so you have that to go back and look at. You can do more than two, but at least do a couple.

50. BIOGRAPHY
Write ten biographies of roughly 250-500 words of significant persons in your world, past or present. In this case, pretend you're writing a wiki article rather than writing from the point of view of someone who lives within the world because, depending on what literacy and technology level your world has in general, there might not be so many significant persons in the world and/or writing biographies might not necessarily be a Thing. Political figures, entertainers, scientists or magicians, people who were simply there on a day to catalyze an event. Serial killers. Revolutionaries. Innovators. Ten biographies, from various points in your world's history. Go!

51. A DAY IN THE LIFE
This one doesn't have to go permanently in your binder at all, it's just an exercise. Try to write an up-to-1,000 word short story about a day in the life of your characters for your main, antagonist, and three bit characters in your novel. Is your world fleshed out enough so that you can do this easily? Which parts did you get stuck on?

52. FINISHING UP
Re-read. Go through outlines and bios, make sure everything fits and logically follows. Add in anything you may have learned from the writing exercises you did subsequent to the questionnaire. Organize it into a form you are comfortable with, and if you have to rewrite the whole thing, it'll help to solidify it in your mind. Because beyond that, you're done! Yay!

